DOCUNENT RESUME
ED 133 827
AUTHOR
TITLE
INSTITUTION
PUB DATE
NOTE
EDRS PRICE
DESCRIPTORS
IDENTIFIERS
EA 009 064
House, Robert 3.
A 1976 Theory of Charismatic Leadership. Working
Paper Series 76-06.
Toronto Univ. (Ontario).
Oct 76
38p.; Paper presented at the Southern Illinois
University Fourth Biennial Leadership Symposium
(Carbondale, Illinois, October 26-28, 1976)
MF-$0.83 HC-$2.06 Plus Postage.
*Bibliographies; *Leadership; Leadership Qualities;
Leadership Styles; Literature Reviews; Personality
Theories; *Theories
*Charisma
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the traditional literature on
charisma, as well as selected social psychology literature the author
feels is relevant to the concept of charisma. Throughout the paper,
the author examines a number of topics related to the concept of
charisma, including charismatic effects, characteristics of
charismatic leaders, behavior of charismatic leaders, and situational
factors associated with the emergence and effectiveness of
charismatic leaders. Based on this analysis, the author develops a
speculative theoretical explanation of charisma from a psychological
perspective, rather than from a sociological or political science
perspective. He also presents eight testable propositions on which to
base further leadership research. (Author/JG)
********************************************************************
Documents acquired by ERIC include many informal unpublished
* materials not available from other sources. ERIC makes every effort *
* to obtain the best copy available. Nevertheless, items of marginal *
* reproducibility are often encountered and this affects the quality *
*
* of the microfiche and hardcopy reproductions ERIC makes available
Service
(EDRS).
EDRS
is
not
* via the ERIC Document Reproduction
* responsible for the quality of the original document. Reproductions *
* supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made from the original.
***********************************************************************U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
EDUCATION A WELFARE
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
EDUCATION
THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REPRO-
DUCED EXACTLY AS RECEIVED FROM
Working Paper Series
THE PERSON OR ORGANIZATION ORIGIN.
ATING IT POINTS OF VIEW OR OPINIONS
STATED DO NOT NECESSARILY REPRE-
SENT OFFICIAL NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
EDUCATION POSITION OR POLICY
FACULTY OF MANAGEMENT STUDIES
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
2A 1976 THEORY OF CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP
ROBERT J. HOUSE
Working Paper
76-06
*Paper to be presented at the Southern Illinois University Fourth Biennial
Leadership Symposium, October 26-28, 1976, Carbondale, Illinois
The author is indebted to Hugh J. Arnold, Martin G. Evans, Harvey Kolodny
Stephan J. Motiwidlo and John A. Dearness for their helpful critique of
this paper.
3Charisma is the term commonly used in the sociological and political
science literature to describe leaders who by force of their personal
abilities are capable of having profound and extraordinary effects on
followers.
These effects include commanding loyalty and devotion to the
leader and of inspiring followers to accept and execute the will of the
leader without hesitation or question or regard to.one s self interest.
The term charisma, whose initial meaning was   gift  , is usually reserved
for leaders who by their influence are able to cause followers to accomplish
outstanding feats.
Frequently such leaders represent a break with the
established order and through their leadership major social changes are
accomplished.
Most writers concerned with charisma or charismatic leadership begin
their discussion with Max Weber s conception of charisma.
Weber describes
as char.:.smatic those leaders who   ... reveal a transcendent mission or
course of action which may be in itself appealing to the potential followers,
but which is acted on because .the followers believe their leader is extra-
ordinarily gifted   (Dow, 1969, p. 307).
to both the qualities of
Transcendence is attributed implicitely
leader and the content of his mission, the
former being variously described as   supernatural, superhuman or exceptional  
(Weber, 1947, p. 358).
Several writers contend that charismatic leadership can and does exist
in formal complex organizations (Dow, 1969; Oberg, 1972; Runelman, 1963;
4- 2-
Shils, 1965).
leaders
Yet despite the profound effects that charismatic
and performance,
are presumed to have on followers  commitment, motivation
almost exclu-
discussions of charisma have been speculative in nature and
sively theoretical.
To the knowledge of this writer none of the theore-
have
tical notions in the sociological or political science literature
these
been subjected to empirical test, despite the fact that many of
notions are implicitly testable.
reviewed
In this paper the traditional literature on charisma will be
will be re-
and, where possible, the major assertions in this literature
stated as propositions in an attempt to make them testable.
In addition
be re-
selected literature from the discipline of social psychology will
the concept
viewed and propositions which the writer believes are relevant to
of charisma will be inferred from the literature.
In the-remainder of this paper the concept of charisma will be examined
under the following topics: charismatic effects, characteristics of charis-
factors asso-
matic leaders, behavior of charismatic leaders, situational
ciated with the emergence and effectiveness of charismatic leaders.
While
these topics will be addressed separately thk.-ty are necessarily intertwined.
Thus, at times a discussion of one topic will have implications for the
other topics, and reference will be made to such implicatiens.
The outcome of this analysis is a speculative theoretical explanation
sociologi-
of charisma from a psychological perspective rather than from a
cal or political science perspective.
Hopefully, such an explanation will
help us to have greater insight into how charismatic leadership emerges
and its effects in modern organizations.
Further, it is hoped that such- 3-
an explanation will provide testable propositions with which to further
leadership research.
The Effects of Charismatic Leadership
In the current literature the term charismatic-leadership is generally
defined and described in terms of the effects of the leader on followers,
or in terms of the relationship between leaders and followers.
For example
Oberg (1972) states that   the test for charisma ... is the degree of de-
votion and trust the object (charismatic leader) inSpires and the degree to
which it enables the individual to transcend his own finiteness and alien-
ation and feel made whole   (p. 22).
Tucker (1968) refers to both   charis-
 ,*
matic following   and the   charismatic relationship  .
Often times, the relationship of the followers to the charis-
matic leader is that of disciples to a master, and in any event
They do not follow him out of fear or
he is revered by them.
monetary inducement, but out of love, passionate devotion,
They are not as a rule concerned with career, pro-,
enthusiasm.
motion, salary, or benefice. The charismatic following is a
non-bureaucratic group   (p. 735).
It appears that all writers agree that the effects of charismatic leadership
are more emotional than calculative in that the follower is inspired to
enthusiastically give unquestioned obedience, loyalty, commitment and de-
votion to the leader and to the cause that the leader represents.
The charismatic leader is seen to be an object of identification by
which the followers emulate the leaders  values, goals, and behavior.
Thus,
one of the effects of the charismatic leader is to cause followers to model
their behavior, feelings, and cognitions after the leader (Friedrich, 1961).
Through the articulation of a transcendent goal the leader is assumed to
clarify or specify a mission for the followers.
By the leader s expression-4-
of self-confidence, and through the exhibition of confidence in followers
the leader is also assumed to inspire self-confidence in the followers.
Thus the charismatic leader is asserted to clarify followers  goals, cause
them to set or accept higher goals and have ,greater confidence in their
ability to contribute to the attainment of such goals.
Finally, according to the traditional literature on charisma the
charismatic leader is assumed to have the effect of bringing about rather
radical change by virtue of beliefs and values that are different from the
established order.
Thus Oberg (1972) speaks of the   change agent   func-
tion of the charismatic leader.
The above review of the effects of charismatic leadership suggest
several dependent variables for a theory of charisma.
Some of these effects
are: follower trust in the correctness of the leader s beliefs, similarity
of followers  beliefs to those of the leader, unquestioning acceptance of
the leader, affection for the leader, willing obedience to the leader,
identification with and emulation of the leader, emotional involvement of
the follower in the mission, heightened goals of the follower, and the
feeling on the part of followers that they will be able to accomplish, or
contribute to the accomplishment of the mission.
This large number of
charismatic effects is consistent with Etzioni s definition of charisma
as   ... the ability of an actor to exercise diffuse and intensive influence
over the normative (ideological) orientations of other actors   (Etzioni,
1962, p. 203).
The charismatic effects listed above constitute an initial list of
variables that can be used as preliminary dependent variables for a theory
7of charisma.
While this number of variables lacks parsimony as the defining
criteria of a charismatic leader, this list of presumed   charismatic
effects   provides a starting point for empiric research on charisma.
If
one were to identify a number of persons in a population (say military or
industrial leaders in a giverr society) whom informed observers (such as
superiors or peers) could agree on as being clearly charismatic, it would
be possible to identify these leaders  effects by measuring the-degree to
which their followers responses to them are different from responses of
followers of other leaders randomly selected from the same population.
The major differcnces in follower responses could then be clustered into
primary groups and scaled.
The scores of the followers on these groups
could then serve as the basis for a more accurate, complete and parsimon-
ious operational definition of charismatic effects.
Leaders who have
such effects on followers could be identified in subsequent samples.
leaders could then be classified as charismatic leaders.
Such
Their personality
characteristics and behaviors could be compared with those of other leaders
(who do not have such effects) to identify characteristics and behaviors
which differentiate the charismatic leaders from others.
This process
of operationally defining charismatic leadership permits one to identify
leaders in a population who have the charismatic effects described in the
traditional literature and thereby specify an operational set of dependent
variables for a theory of.leadership.
Some of the above effects have also been the dependent variables in
social-psychological research.
Specifically, the ability of one person
to arouse needs and enhance self-esteem of others, and the ability of one- 6 -
person to successfully serve as a behavioral model for another have been
the soject of substantial empirical investigation by psychologists.
In
later sections of this paper we will review this research,in an attempt
to identify and describe the specific situarional factors and leader be-
haviors that result in such   charismatic   effects.
Defining charismatic leadership in terms of its effects permits one
to identify charismaticileaders only after they have had an imPact on
followers.
Such a definition says nothing about the personal character-
istics, behaviors, or situational factors that bring about the charismatic
effects.
This is the sgientific challenge that must be addressed if the
mysterious quality of charismatic leadership is to be explained and
charismatic effects are t o be made predictable.
We now turn to a discus-
sion of these issues.
Definition of Charismatic Leadership
Throughout this paper the term charismatic leader will be used to
refer to any leader who has the above   charismatic effects   on followers
to an unusually high degree.
1
The specific operational definition of a
given charismatic leader awaits research which will allow one to scale the
effects and establish specific cutting points on such scales to differentiate
charismatic leaders from other leaders.
1
While it is not likely that all
This definition would be tautological if the   charismatic effects   were
not operationally discovered using two independent operations. However
since the discovery of the   charismatic effects   involves having charis-
matic leaders identified by one set of observers (peers or superiors) and
specification of their effects by an independent set of observers, (namely
their followers) such a definition avoids the tautological problem.- 7 -
charismatic leaders have all of the above   charismatic effects,   there
For example such effects
are many possibilities that can be examined.
may be present in a complex interacting manner.
Alternatively it may be
the sum of, or some absolute level of selected effects that do indeed
differentiate charismatic leaders from others.
Characteristics of the Charismatic Leader
Both the literature concerning charismatic leadership and the opinion
of laymen seem to agree that the charismatic leader, can be described by a
specific set of personal characteristics.
According to Weber the charis-
matic leader is accepted by followers because both the leader and the
follower perceive the leader as possessing a certain extraordinary gift.
This   gift   of charisma is seldom specified and generally held to be some
mysterious quality that defies definition.
In actuality the   gift   is
likely to be a complex interaction of personal characteristics, the be-
havior the leader employs, characteristics of followers and certain situa-
tional factors pervailing at the time of the assumption of the leadership
role.
The literature on charismatic leadership repeatedly attributes three
personal characteristics to leaders who have charismatic effects, namely:
extremely high levels of self-confidence, dominance, and a strong convic-
,
2
tion in the moral righteousness of his/her beliefs.
2
It is interesting to
it is entirely possible that charismatic leaders present themselves
as highly confident and as having a strong conviction in the moral right-
eousness of their beliefs but do not indeed believe in either themselves
Some leaders may thus have charismatic effects because
or their beliefs.
act as though they have such confidence and convic-
of their ability
The writt_ is indebted to Ed Locke for pointing out this alter-
tions.
native hypothesis.
10- 8 -
attributed to charis-
note that three of these characteristics are also
matic leaders by laymen as well as by scholars.
As a classroom exercise
small groups and
I have on three occasions asked students to form into
leader that they have
to discuss the characteristics of some charismatic
personally known or to whom they have been exwsed.
These groups re-
dis-
peatedly described the charismatic leaders that they selected for
cusion as possessing dominance,
self-confidence and a strong conviction
in their beliefs and ideals.
and
While the consensus of political science and sociological writers
evidence that leaders who
the results of my awn informal experiment are not
the ar-
have charismatic effects do indeed possess these characteristics,
gument is certainly subject to an empiric test with self-report measures
f personality traits, beliefs and values.
hypothesized
In addition to the characteristics discussed above it is
have
here that leaders who have charismatic effects have a high need to
influence over others.
Such a need seems intuitively likely to characterize
unlikely
leaders who have such effects because without such a need they are
and
to have developed the necessary persuasive skills to influence others
also unlikely to obtain satisfaction from the leadership role.
Uleman
(1972) has developed a measure of the need for influenctthat can be used
to test the above hypotheses.
The following proposition summarizes the above discussion:
PROPOSITION 1
Characteristics that differentiate leaders who have charismatic
effects on subordinates from leaders who do not have such char-
ismatic effects are dominance and self-confidence, need for
influence, and a strong conviction in the moral righteousness
of their beliefs.
119
Behavior of Charismatic Leaders
The sociological and political science literature offer some hints
about the behavior of charismatic leaders.
Role Modeling:
First it is suggested that leaders who have charismatic
effects behave in the manner in which they want their followers to behave.
That is the leader   role models   for the followers.
Gandhi constitutdes an
utstanding example of such systematic and intentional role modeling.
Hn
preached self-sacrifice, brotherly love, and non-violent resistance to
British rule.
Repeatedly he engaged in self-sacrificing behaviors such as
giving up his lucrative law practice ea live the life of a peasant, engaging 
in civil disobedience, fasting, and refusing to accept the ordinary con-
veniences offered to him by others.
The importance of role modeling as a leadership strategy is illustrated
by Gandhi s proposed leadership policies for the self-governance of India.
Most important for Gandhi was the example that leaders set for
their followers ...  No leader of an independent India will hesi-
tate to give an example by cleaning out his own toilet box. 
(Collins and LaPierre, 1975, pp. 234-235).
Concerning role modeling, a study by Joestling and Joestling (1972)
is suggestive of the effects that a high status role model can have on
Male and female students were asked to rate
the self-esteem of observers.
the value of being a woman.
Half of the students were enrolled in the
class taught by a qualified female instructor.
Twenty-six percent of the
women subjects in the class taught by a male thought there was nothing
good about being a woman.
In contrast only five percent of the women,
subjects in the class taught by a qualified female had similar negative
attitudes toward being a woman.10
While role modeling often proves successful, success does not always
occur.
The question then is what permits-a leader to Le a successful
role model, i.e. to be emulated by the followers.
There is substantial evidence that a person is more likely to be
modeled to the extent that that person is perceived as nurturant (i.e.
helpful, sympathetic, approving) and as being succesrful or possessing
competence.
There is evidence that role modeling can have profound effects.
Be-
havior resulting from modeling may be very specific such that the indivi-
dual can be said to imitate or mimic the behavior of the model.
Or, the
behavior may be more general, taking the form of innovative behavior,
generalized behavior orientations and applications of principles for
generating novel combinations of responses (Bandura, 1968).
Bandura (1968) reviews a substantial body of experimental evidence
that shows that:
(a)
Model s emotional responses to rewards or punishments elicit similar
emotional responses in observers (p. 240).
(b)
Stable changes in the valences (a measure of attractiveness) subjects
assign to outcomes and changes in long standing attitudes often
result from the role modeling (pp. 243-244), and;
(c)
Modeling is capable of developing generalized conceptual and behavioral
propertiet
sf observers such as moral judgement orientations and
delay-of-gratification patterns of behavior (p. 252)..
Of particular significance for the study of leadership are the diverse
kin,is of attitudes, feelings and behavior and the diversity of subjects
13involved in prior studies.
degree to which:
Role modeling has been shown to influence the
(a) underg aduate females learn assertive behavior in
assertiveness training programs (Young, Rimm and Kennedy, 1973); (b) mentally
disturbed patients agsume independence in their personal life (Goldstein,
et al., 1973); (c) undergraduates are willing to disclose unfavorable or
favorable anxiety related information to others (Sarason, Ganzer and Singer,
1972);
(d) personal changes and learning outcomes result from adult t-groups
(Peters, 1973); (e) individuals are willing to induce punishment (electric
shock) to others (Baron, 1971); (0 nurses eXperience fear of ttlerculosis
(DeWolfe, 1967); (g) subjects adopt biased atLitudes toward minority ethnic
groups (Stotland and Patchin, 1961; Kelman, 1958).
Many of the subjects in the above studies were either college students
-
or adultS.
Thus, the findings are not limited to yoUng childrenNbut are
also relevant to persons in full-time occupations.
Further, tht dependent
variables are all of significance for effective organizational or group
performance.
Feelings of fear, willingness to disClose inforMation unfavor-
able - to self, stereotyping, willingness to administer punishment, prejudi-
t.1
cial attitudes, learning of interpersonal skills, and learning of indepen-
dence are relevant to interpersonal relations within organizations.
Similarly, these cocnitions and behaviors are relevn-t to the estabiishment
of trust, to adequac:
f rmjnunication and to experiences that are satis-
fying in organizational life.
Thus it is argued here that role modeling is one of the processes by
which leaders can bring about charismatic effects.
Furthermore, it is
likely that the feelings, cognitions and behavior that are modeled frequently- 12 -
determine subordinates  adjustment to organizational life, tueir job satis-
faction and their motivation to work.
With respect to motivation the above
findings suggest that leaders can have an effect on the values (or valences)
subordinates  attach to the outcomes of their effort as well as their
expectations.
And, as will be discussed below, leaders can also have an
effect on subordinates  self-esteem, and their goal levels.
Based on the
following
above review of the literature concerned with roleymodeling, the
proposition is advanced:
PROPOSITION 2
The more favorable the perceptions of the potential follower
toward a leader the more similar will be:
a) The valences of the folldwer and the leader
b) The expectations of the leader and the follower that
effective performance of the follower will xesult in
desirgd or undesired outcomes for the subordinate
c) The emotional responses of the follower and the leader
to work related stimuli
d) The attitudes of the follower and the leader toward their
work and toward the organization..
Here   favorable perceptions   is defined as the perceptions of the leader as
attractive, nurturant, successful or competent.
Image Building.
If proposition 2 is valid then it can be speculated
that leaders who have charismatic effects engage not only in the behaviors
they want followers to model but also that such leaders take actions con-
sciously designed to be viewed favorably by followers.
This speculation
leads to the following proposition:
PROPOSITION 3
Leaders who have charismatic effects are more likely to engage
in behaviors designed to create the impression of competence and
success than leaders who do not have such effects.
15This proposition is colsistent with the traditional literature on charisma-
tic leadership.
Weber (1947) speaks of the necessity of the charismatic
leader to   prove   his extraordinary powers to the followers.
as he can do so will he be recognized.
Only as long
While Weber and others have argued
that such   proof   lies in actual accomplishments, the above proposition
st,esses ihe appearance of accomplishments and asserts that charismatic
leaders engage in behaviors to gain such an appearance.
Goal Articulation.
In the traditional literature on charisma it is
Irequently asserted that charismatic leaders articulate a   transcendent  
goal which becomes the basis of a movement or a cause.
Such a goal is
ideological rather than pragmatic and is laden with moral overtones.
Altc...r-
natively, if a movement is already in effect one behavior of the emers,
leader is the articulation of the goal of the movement with conviction and
exhortation of the moral rightness of the goal (Tucker, 1968; p. 738).
Examples of such goals are Martin Luther King s   I have a dream  ,
Hitler s   Thousand year Reich   and his   lebensraum  , or Gandhi s vision
of an India in which Hindus and Moslems would live in brotherly love,
independent from British rule.
Berlew states:
The first requirement for ... charismatic leadership is a
common or shared vision for what the future could be. To
provide meaning and generate excitement, such a common vision
must reflect goals or a future state of affairs that is valued
by the organizations members and thus important to them to
bring about. ... All inspiratioral speeches or writings have
the common element of some vision or dream of a better exis-
tance which will inspire or excite those who share the author s
va: cs. This basic wisdom too often has been ignored by
(1974; p. 269).
managers.
16- 14 -
Thus the following proposition is advanced:
PR13POITION 4
Leaders who have charismatic effects are more likely to
articulate ideological goals than leaderz .Rho do not hwie
such effects.
Exhibiting High.Expectations and Showing Confidence:
Leaders who
*
communicate high performance expectations for subordinates and exhibit
confidence in their ability to ineet.suCh expectations are hypothesized
to enhance subordinates  self-esteem and to affect the goals subordinates
accept or set for themselves.
Some examples of this kind of charismatic
leader behavior are Churchill s statement that England s air defense in
World War II was   England s finest hour,   Hitler s claim that aryans were
rthe master race,   black leaders  exhortation that   Black.is beautiful,  
and Martin Luther King s prediction that   We shall overcome.  
All of
these statements imply high expectations and confidence in the followers.
There is substantial evidence that the degree of self-esteem and the
 expectation that one can accomplish one s goals are positively related to
motivation and goal attainment.
Persons with high self-esteem are more
likely than low self-esteem persons to seek higher personal rewards for
performance (Pepitone, 1964),. and to choose occupations that are con-
gruent with self-perceived traits (Korman, 1966, 1969) and self-perceived
ability level (Korman, 1967b).
Further, Korman (1968) has shown experimen-
tally that for high  self-esteem subjects there is a positive relationship
between task performance and satisfaction but that no such relationship
exists for
ow self-esteem subjects.
Raben and Klimoski (1973) have also
shown experimentally that h1i self-esteem subjects are more likely than
17
4:- 15-
low self-esteem subjects to rise to the challenge of doing a task for
which they believe they are not qualified.
Thus, it is argued here that
Tho_tha, extent that the leader can affect the self-esteem of subordinates,
leader behavior will have an effect or: the kinds of rewards subordinates
seek, th,-!ir satisfaction with the rewards they obLaln and their motiva-
tion to perform effectively.
The effect of leader behavior on subordinate self-esteem has been
given little attention in the leadership literature.
The assertion that
leaders can affect subordinates  self-esteem is derived from two lines
of research: research concerning the role modeling effects and research
concerned with reality testing.
We have already argued that through role modeling leaders can.have a
rather profound effect on subordinates  beliefs.
self-esteem which is defir.cd by Lawler (1971, p.
One of these beliefs is
107) as the belief that
subordinates  have with respect to their own general level of ability to
cope with and control their environment.
It is argued here that subor-
dinates  selt-perceptions are likely to be m deled after the leaders
perceptions of the subordinates.
Thus if the leader communicates high per-
formance expectations and shows confidence in subordinates they will in
turn set or accept a higher goal for themselves and have greater confi-
dence in themselves.
The second line of research suggesting that leaders affect subor-
dinates  self-esteem is that research.concerned with   reality testing  .
In social situations where inter-personal evaluation is highly subjective,
individuals tend to    reality test   i.e. to test their notions of reality
against the opinions of others (Festinger, 1950; Deutsch and Gerard, 1955).
18
.34- 16-
Consequently, to the extent that the leader shows followers that he/she
believes them to be competent and personally responsible the followers
are hypothesized to also perceive themselves as competent.
This self-per-
ception is hypothesized to enhance motivation, performance and satisfaction.
Some indirect evidence in support of this line of reasoning is found in the
results of studies by Berlew and Hail (1966), Stedry and Kay (1966), Kotiran
(1971), Rosenthal and Jacobson (1968), Seaver (1973), and Meichenbaum,
Bowers and Ross (1969).
Berlew and Hall (1966) and Stedry and Kay (1966)
in field studies both found that individual perforiance increased as a
function of the level of expectation superiors communicated to the indivi-
duals.
Similarly, Korman (1971) showed in a laboratory study that the
performance nf. students  on creative tasks were a direct positive function
of the expectations that other college students had for the laidtratory
subjects.
Korman (1971) also showed that ratings of subordinates  per-
,
formance in two field settings and self-ratings of motivation in three
field settings were all significantly correlated with the degree to which
subordinates perceived their leaders  practices to reflect confidence in
the subordinates.
These findings are  consistent with those conducted in educational
settings in which the expectations of teachers have been shown to be re-
flected in the performance of students (Ropenthal and Jacobson, 1968;
Ceaver, 1973; Meichenbaum, Bowers and Ross, 1969).
In these studies teachers
were induced to believe that certain students were more competent than
others.
This belief, or expectancy, on the part of the teacher was shown
to be associated with higher student performance.
However, there are also
studies conducted in educational settings,which have failed to demonstrate
,
19- 17 -
an effect of teachers  expectancies on students  performance (Anderson
and Rosenthal, 1968; Claiborn, 1969; Conn, Edwards, Rosenthal and Crowne,
.1968;.Evans and Rosenthal, 1969; Fiedler, Cohen and Finney, 1971).
Seaver (1973) points out that in all of these disconfirming studies and
also in the Rosenthal and Jacobson study which is the subject of much
controversy, the means of inducing teacher expectations were weak and thus
... the failure to find expectancy effects may be attributable solely to
their failure to induce the desired expectancy in teachers   (p. 341).
If it is assumed that the leader s expectation of subordinates affect
the subordinates  self-esteem and their self-esteem in turn affects their
performance then the above studies all provide indirect support for the
assertion that leader s expectations affect subordinate s performance.
The combination of leader s confidence and high expectations, rather
than high expectations alone, should be emphasized here.
It is possible
that leaders might set high performance standards thus implying hieLex-
pectations of subordinates, while at the same time showing low confidence
in the subordinates  ability to meet such expectations.
An example of
this would be the leader who scores high on such questionnaire iters   he
needles foremen for production!   (Fleishman, Note 1).
While such le.ader
behavior may motivate subordinates to strive for high performance in order
to avoid punishment, it is also likely to induce fear of failure.
Such
a state in turn will likely be accompanied by efforts to avoid account-
ability on the part of the subordinates, strong feelings of dissatisfaction,
low acceptance of the leader and resistance to the leaders  influence
attempts in the long run.
20- 18 -
Thus, while leader expectations are considered to have a significant
effect on the reactions of subordinates, high expectations are hypothesized
to have a positive effect only when subordinates
perceive the superior
to also have confidence in their (the subordinates ) ability to meet such
expectations.
Effect on Followers  Goals:
In addition to affecting the self-esteem
of subordinatec, leader expectations and confidence are also hypothesized
-o affect sc\eral important characteristics of the subordinates  goals.
n t1
ol1owing paragraphs we review the research concerned with goal
characteristics.
In a series of laboratory studies, Loae and his associates (Bryan
and Locke, 1967a, 1967b; Locke and Bryan, 1966a, 1966b) have demonstrated
that when subjects are given specific goals by the experimenter they per-
form at significantly higher levels than chose given the,instruction to
  do your,best.  
Two field studies (Mace, 1935; Mendleson, 1971) also offer
support for the generalizability of these laboratory finding
field settings.
to natural
Thus, it is argued here that if laboratory experimenters
can influence the goal characteristics of experimental subjects it seems
reasonable that leaders can have similar influence on the goal character-
istics of subordinates.
cpecific and high expectations of leaders are hypothesized to clarify
subordinates  performance goals.
Further, it is hypothesized that the more
the leader Shows confidence in the subordinates  ability to meet goals the
more subordinates are likely to accept them as realistic and attainable.
Specific and high leader expectations are likely to provide a standard
against which subordinates can evaluate their own performance.
21
Accordingly,- 19-
it is hypothesized here that leaders  expectations also serve as a basis on
which subordinates may derive feedback.
Finally it is hypothesized that
when the leader s expectations are both high and clear to the subordinate
and when the leader shows confidence in the subordinate s ability to meet
such expectations, the subordinate will set and/or accept higher goals for
themselves than would oCaerwise be the case, and will have more confidence
that they will be able to meet the goals.
The above hypotheses concerning the leaders  effect on followers self-
esteem and goals can be summarized in the following proposition:
PROPOSITION 5
Leaders who simultaneously communicate high expectations of, and
confidence in followers are more likely to have followers who
accept the goals of the leader and believe that they can contri-
bute to goal accomplishment and are more likely to have followers
who strive to meet specific and challenging performance standards.
Motive Arousal Leader Behavior:
One explanation for the emotional
appeal of the charismatic leader may be the specific content of the messages
he communicates to followers.
It is speculated here that charismatic
leaders communicate messages that arouse motives that are especially rele-
vant to missicn accomplishment.
For example Gandhi s exhortations of
love and acceptance of one s fellow man likely aroused the need for affilia-
tion, a need (or motive) especially relevant to the goal of uniting Hindus,
Moslems and Christians.
Military leaders often employ symbols of authoritarianism and evoke
the image of the enemy.
Thus arousing the power motive, a motive especially
relevant to effective combat performance.
For example Patton (1963) when
addressing infantry recruits would do so against the background of a large
22- 20-
and, wearing
American flag, and dressed with medals of his accomplishments
indicating the status of general.
a shining helmet displaying the four stars
under
Miner s research is relevant to defining some of the conditions
with successful per-
which the arousal of the need for power is associated
formance.
Miner found that individuals who were high on a projective
be
(sentence completion) measure of the power need were more likely to
successful in hierarchical bureaucratic organizations than individuals low
on the power need.
These findings did not hold true in egalitarian non-
bureaucratic organizations however (Miner, 1965).
Industrial leaders and leaders of scientists frequently stress ex-
the need
cellence of performance as a measure of one s worth, thus arousing
for achievement, a motive especially relevant to the assumption of personal
responsibility, persistence and pride in high quality work performance.
associated
Varga (1975) has shown that the need for achievement is ppsitively
development
with economic and technical performance among Tesearch and
project leaders.
He has also shown that the need for power is a strong
factor contributing to such success when in conjunction with the need for
leaders low
achievement but a factor making fol. failure when possessed by
on the need for achievement.
There is some evidence that formally appointed leaders in a laboratory
situation are capable of arousing subordinate s need for achievement
(Litwin and Stringer, 1968).
There is also a substantial amount of evidence
from
that the achievement, affiliation and power needs can be aroused
experimental inductions.
For example the need for achievement has been
aroused for males by suggesting to subjects that the experimental task
is a measure of personal competence, or that the task is a standard against
23- 21-
al.,
which one can measure his general level of ability (McClelland et
1958; McClelland, 1953; Raynor, 1974; Heckhausen, 1967).
fraternity
The need for affiliation has been aroused by having
friend-
members rate one another, while all were present, on a sociometric
requiring
ship index (Shipley and Veroff, 1952) while at the -same time
each brother to stand and be rated by the other members of the fraternity
on a list of trait adjectives.
The power need has been aroused experimentally by (a) evoking the
image of, or remainding ohe of an enemy,
(b) having subjects observe the
exercise of power by one person over another or (c) allowing subjects to
exercise power over another (Winter, 1973).
Thus it is hypothesized that
needs can be, and often are, similarly aroused by leaders in natural settings.
By stressing the challenging aspects of tasks, making group members accep-
tance of each other salient to performance appraisal or talking about com-
petition from others, it is hypothesized that leaders can and frequently
do arouse the needs for achievement, affiliation and power.
Further it is
hypothesized that to the extent that such motives are associated with
task required performance, the leaders arousal of these motives will result
in increased effectiveness on the part of subordinates.
Thus the perform-
the task requirements.
ance consequence of motive arousal is contingent on
For example, when task demands of subordinates requires assumption of
calculated risks, achievement oriented initiative, assumption of personal
responsibillty, and persistance toward challenging goals, the arousal of
the need for achievement will facilitate task accomplishment.
Further,
there is evidence that when subordinates  need for achievement is high,
24- 22-
task accomplishment will lead to satisfaction.
When subordinates  ne(
for achievement is low task accomplishment will not be related to satis-
faction (Steers, 1975).
When the task demands of subordinates require them to be persuasive,
assert influence over or exercise control of others, or be highly com-
petitive or combative, the arousal of the power motive is hypothesized
to be related to effective performance and satisfaction.
For example on
competitive tasks, or tasks requiring persuasion or aggression, the arousal
of the power motive is hypothesized to lead to effective performance.
Finally, when tasklbemands require affiliative behavior, as in the
case of tasks requiring cohesiveness, team work and peer support, the
arousal of the affiliative motive becomes highly relevant to performance
and satisfaction.
An example of such tasks would be tasks that are
enriched by assignment of major work goals to groups rather than indivi-
duals (Trist and Bramforth, 1951).
These speculations are summarized with the following proposition:
PROPOSITION 6
Leaders who have charismatic effegts are more likely to engage
in behaviors that arouse motives relevant to the accomplishment
of the mission than are leaders who do not have charismatic
effects.
Social Determinants of Charismat
le:Idership
The traditional literature (Weber, 1947) stresses that charismatic
leadership is born out of stressful situations.
It is argued that such
leaders express sentiments deeply held by followers.
25
ThAke sentiments- 23-
and thus their expression is
are different from the established order
likely to be harzardous to the leader (Friedland, 1964).
As the expres-
sympathetic to
sion of sentiments are deeply held by followers they are
Since their expression is harzardous
the cause expressed by the leader.
the leader is perceived as courageous.
Because of other   gifts   attributed
believe that
to the leader such as extraordinary competence the followers
them from
the leader will bring about social change and will thus deliver
their plight.
the
Thus it can be hypothesized that a strong feeling of distress on
the_
part of followers is one situational factor that interacts with
characteristics and behavior of leaders to result in charismatic effects.
However Shils (1965) argues that charisma need not be born out of
distress.
Rather, according to Shils charisma is dispersed throughout
Accordingly, persons holding positions
the formal institutions of society.
  awe-inspiring  
of great power will be perceived as charismatic because of the
quality of power.
Shils  only requirement is that the expression of power
must appear to be integrated with a transcendent goal.
The above controversy suggests the hypothesis that leaders are more
likely to have charismatic effects in situations stressful for followers
than in non-stressful situations.
Further it can be hypothesized  hat
persons with the characteristics of dominance, self-confidence, need for
influence and strong convictions will be more likely to emerge as leaders
under stressful conditions.
Whether or not follower distress is a nec-
essary condition for leaders to have charismatic effects or-for persons
with such charactt  sties to emerge as leaders is an empirical question
that remains to be
ted.
26- 24-
While there is lack of agreement as to whether or not leaders can
all writers do
have charismatic effects under unon-stressful situations,
ideo
Seem to agree that charisma must be based on the articulation of an
logical goal.
Opportunity to articulate such a goal, whether in stressful
of the si-
or non-stressful situations, thus can be hypothesized as one
/
tuational requirements for a person to have charismatic effects.
This
defined
hypothesis suggests that whenever the roles of followers can be
follower, a leadel. can
as contributing to ideological values held by the
engaging in the
have charismatic effects by stressing such values.and
specific behaviors described in the above propositions.
definable
The question then is under what circumstances are roles
terms of ideological values.
Clearly the roles of followers in political,
values.
or religious movements can be defined in terms of ideological
In
addition Berlew (1974) argues that since man seeks meaning in work there
formal organizations.
are many such ideological values to be stressed in modern
Specifically he argues that any of the following value-related opportunities
listed in figure 1 c an have a charismatic effect.
There are some work roles in society which do not lend themselves
to ideological value orientation.
These are generally the roles requiring
highly routinc nonthinking effort in institutions directed exclusively to
economic ends,  It is hard to conceive of clerks or assembly line workers
in profit making firms as perceiving their roles as ideologically oriented.
However the same work when directed toward an ideological goal could lend
itself to charismatic leadership.
For example in World War II   Rosie the
Riviter   expressed the ideological contribution of an assembly line worker.
And, such menial efforts as stuffing envelopes frequently are directed
27- 25 -
toward ideological goals in political or religious organizations.
The
following proposition summarizes the above argument:
PROPOSITION 8
A necessary condition for a leader to have charismatic effects
is that the role of followers be definable in ideological terms
that appeal to the follower.
Summary and Overview
iigure 2 presents a diagramatic overview of the theory presented above.
It is hypotheSized that leadc,:s who have charismatic effects are differen-
tiated from others by some combination (possibly additive and possibly
interactive) .of the four personal characteristics shown in the upper right
box: dominance, self-confidence, need for influence, and a strong convic-
tion in the moral righteousness of his or her beliefs.
Charismatic leaders
are hypothesized to employ these characteristics with the following specific
behaviors:
goal articulation, role modeling, personal image building, demon-
stration of confidence and high expectations for followers, and motive
arousal behaviors.
Goal articulation and personal image -building are hypo-
thesized to result in favorable perceptions of the leader by followers.
These favorable perceptions are asserted to enhance followers trust, loyalty
and obedience to the leader and elk) to mpderate the relationships between
the Temaining leader behaviors and the follower esponses to the leader.
follower responses are hypothesized to result in effective performance if
the aroused behavior is appropriate for their
demands.
Conclusion - Why a 1976 Theory
This paper presents a   1976   theory of charismatic leadership.
28
The
The- 26-
date, 1976, is attached to the title to reflect the philosphy of science
of the writer.
The theory is advanced for the purpose of guiding future
research and not as a conclusive explanation of the charismatic phenomona.
As such it includes a set of propositions that are hopefully testable.
Admittedly tests of the theory will require the development and validation
However it is hoped that the propositions are at
of several new scales.
least presently testable in principle.
  A theory that can not be mortally
endangered cannot be alive   (cited in Platt from personal communication by
W.A.H. Ruston).
The results of
-dric tests of the theory will undoubtedly require
revision of the theory.
It is believedby the writer that theories, no
matter how good at explaining a set of phenomona, are ultimately incorrect
and consequently will undergo modification over time (see Kuhn, 1970 for
evidence of this assertion).
Thus as Mackenzie and House (1976) have
stated   ... the fate of the better theories is to become explanations that
hold for some phenomona in some limited conditions.  
Or, as Hebb (1962,
p. 21) asserts   A good theory is one that hold together long enough to
get you to a better theory.  
Hopefully at some future date this theory will have led to a better
theory.
2 9- 27 -
Figure 1
Sources of Meaning in Orgardzation_p:
Opportunities and Related Valuesw
Type of Opportunity
Related Need or Value
1. A chance to be tested; to make it on one s
own
2. A social experiment, to combine work,
family, and play in some new way
something welle.g., re-
turn to real craftsmanship; to be really
3. A chance to
Self-reliance
Self-actualization
Community
Integration of life
Excellence
Unique accomplishment
creative
4. A chanee to do something goode.g.. run
an honest, no rip-off business, or a youth
Consideration
Service
counselling center
5. A chance to change the way things are
e.g., from Republican to Democrat or So-
cialist, from war to peace, from unjust to
just.
*Source Berlew, 1974
30
Activism
Social responsibility
CitizenshipFigure 2
A MODEL OF CHARISMATIC LEADERSHIP
PERSONAL IMAGE BUILDING
GOAL ARTICULATION
FAVORABLE PERCEPTIONS LEADER CHARACTERISTICS
OF LEADER ON PART UNUSUALLY HIGH
- DOMINANCE
OF FOLLOWERS
- SELF-CONFIDENCE
NEED FOR INFLUENCE
- BELIEF IN OWN VALUES
!LEADER MOTIVE
LEADER ROLE
AROUSAL SEHAVIOR
MODELING OF
LEADER COMMUNICATION
OF HIGH PERFORMANCE
EXPECTATIONS OF, AND
VALUE SYSTEM
,CONFIDENCE IN, FOLLOWERS
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
111111,1111
1
1
1
1
1
1
   I ll
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
EMULAT ON OF AROUSAL OF FOLLOWER ENHANCE SELF-ESTEEM
TRUST IN LEADER LEADER S VALUE NEEDS, ACCEPTANCE BY AND PERFORMANCE
LOYALTY TO LEADER SYSTEM BY FOLLOIERS FOLLOWERS OF EXPECTATIONS OF
UNQUESTIONING ACCETTANCE CHALLENGING GOALS FOLLOWERS
OF LEADER
OBEDIENCE TO LEADER
,
EFFECTIVE FOLLOWER PERFORMANCE IF AROUSED BEHAVIOR
IS APPROPRIATE FOR TASK DEMANDS
[
31
 Dotted lines indicate that favorable perceptions moderate the relationship
between leader behavior and follower responses,- 29 -
Note
1.
Fleishman, E.A.
naire.
Manual For the Supervisory Behavior Description Question-
Washington, D.C.: American Institutes for Research, 1972.
33- 30-
References
Some effects of interpersonal expectancy
Anderson, D.F., & Rosenthal, R.
and social interaction on institutionalized retarded children.
Proceedings of the 76th Annual Convention of the American Psychological
Association, 1968, 3, 479-480.
Social learning theory of identificato.iy process, in David A.
Bandura, A.
Goslin (Ed.) Handbook of Socialization Theory and Research, Chicago:
Rand McNally, 1968.
Exposure to an agressive model and apparent probability
Baron, Robert A.
of retaliation from the victim as determinqnts of adult aggressive
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1971.
behavior.
Berger, P.L. Charisma and relig$ous innovation: the social location of
Israelite prophecy. American Sociological Review, 28, December, 1963,
940-950.
Berlew, D.E. Leadership and organizational excitement, in Organizational
Psychology, D.A. Kolb, I.M. Burbin and James M. McIntryre (Eds.),
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1974.
Berlew, D.E. and Hall, D.T. The socialization of managers: effects of
expectations on performance. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1966,
11
207-223.
Bryan, J.F. and Locke, E.A. Goal-setting as a means of increasing motivation.
(a)
Journal of Applied Psychology, 1967, 51, 274-277.
Bryan, J.F. and Locke, E.A. Parkinson s law as a goal-setting phenonomon.
(b)
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1967, 2 258-75.
Claiborn, W.L. Expectancy effects in the classroom: a failure to replicate.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 1969, 60, 377-383.
Collins, L. and LaPierre, D.
Schuster, 1975.
Freedom At Midnight.
New York: Simon and
Conn, L.K., Edwards, C.N., Rosenthal, R., and Crowne, D. Perception of
emotion and response to teachers  expectancy by elementary school
children. Psychological RepOrts, 1968, 22, 27-34.
Identification and fear decrease.
DeWolfe, Alan S.
Psyctiology, 1967, 31(3), 259-263.
34
A
Journal of Consulting- 31 -
Dow, Thomas E. The theory of charisma.
10, 306-318.
Sociological Quarterly, 1969,
Gandhi s Truth: On the Origins of Militant Non-Violence.
Erikson, E.H.
New York: W.W. Norton and Co., Inc., 1969.
A Com arative Analysis of Complex Organizations.
Etzioni, A.
The Free Press, 1961.
New York:
Interpersonal self-fulfilling prophecies:
further extrapolations from the laboratory to the classroom.
Proceedings of the 77th Annual Convention of the American Psychological
Association, 1969, 4, 371-372.
Evans, J.T., and Rosenthal , R.
Farago, Ladislas.
Inc., 1963.
Patton: Ordeal and Triumph.
Featinger, Leon. Informal social communication.
1950, 57, 271-82.
New York: Ivan Obolensky,
Psychological Review,
Fielder, W.R., Cohen, R.D., and Finney, S. An attempt to replicate the
1223-1228.
te?cher expectancy effect. Psychological Reports, 1971, 29,
for industry, in R.M.
Fle shman, E.A. A leader behavior description
(Eds.),
Leader
Behavior:
Its Description
Stogdill and A.E. Coons
Ohio State
Columbus:
Bureau
of
Business
Research,
and Measurement.
University, 1957.
For a sociological concept of charisma.
Frieiland, W.H.
43 18-26.
1964, --a_
Social Forces,
to
Political leadership and the problem of the charismatic
Fr_adrich, Carl J.
The
Journal
of Politics, 1961, 23, 3-24.
power.
Goldstein, Arnold P., et al. The use of modeling.to increase independent
(Feb.), 11(1), 31-42.
behavior. Behavior Research and Therapy, 1973
Cunningham and
Hazlett, J.S. Response to Martin Burlingame, in L.L.
The
Science
and
the Art Today,
W.J. Gephart,.(Eds.), Leadership:
Itaska, Illinois, 1973.
Hebb, D.O. Hebb on hocus-pocus:
Psychology Today, 6, 1969.
a conversation with Elizabeth Hall,
Heckhausen, H. The Anatomy of Achievement Motivation.
Academic Press, 1967.
35
New York:-% 32 -
belingingness
Joestling, J., and Joestling, R. Sex differences in group
Psychological
Reports,
1972, 31
as influenced by instructor s sex.
717-718.
Compliance, idnetification and internalization: three
Kelman, H.C.
1958,.51-60.
processes of attitude change, Conflict Resolution, 2,
Self-esteem variable in vocational choice.
Korman, A.K.
Applied Psychology, 1966, 50, 479-486.
Journal of
Self-esteem as a moderator of the relationship between
Korman, A.K.
Journal of Applied Psy-
perceived abilities and vocational choice.
chology, 1967, 51, 65-67.
Task success, task popularity, and self-esteem.
Korman, A.K.
of Applied Psychology, 1968, 484-490.
Self-esteem as a moderator in vocational choice.
Korman, A.K.
of Applied Psychology, 1969, 53, 188-192.
Expectancies as determinants of performance.
Korman, A.K.
Applied Psychology, 1971, 55, 218-222.
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
The University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Kuhn, T.S.
Journal
Journal
Journal of
Chicago, Ill.:
Motivation and Organization Climate.
Litwin, G.H. and Stringer, R.A., Jr.
Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Administration,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1968.
performance:
Locke, E.A. and Bryan, J.F. Cognitive aspects of psychomotor
Journal
goals
on
level
of
performance.
The effects of performance
of Applied Psychology, 1966, 50, 286-291. (a)
learning
Locke, E.A. t;nd Bryan, J.F. The effects of goal setting, rule
American
Journal
of
Psychologx,
and knowledge of score on performance.
(b)
1966, 79, 451-457.
Mace, C.A. Incentives: Some EXperimental Studies.
Health Research Board, 1935, Report No. 72.
London: Industrial
Paradigm development in the social sciences:
Mackenzie, K.D. and House, R.J.
stretegy,
University of Toronto Working Paper #75-03,1975.
a proposed research
McClelland, D.C.
The Acheivement Motive.
1953.
36
New York: Appleton-Century-Croft,- 33-
McClelland, D.C., Clark, R.A., Roby, T.B. and Atkinson, J.W. The effect
In Atkinson,
of the need for achievement on thematic apperception.
New York:
Motives in Fantasy, Action, and Society.
J.W. (Ed.)
Van Nostrand, 1953.
Meichenbaum, D.H., Bowers, K.S., and Ross, R.R. A behavioral analysis of
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
teacher expectancy effect.
1969, 13, 306-316.
Mendleson, J.
Managerial Goal Setting: An Exploration Into Its Meaning
and Measurement.
East Lansing, Michigan: Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation, Michiga State University, 1971.
Miner, J.B.
Studies in Management Education.
New York: Springer, 1965.
Oberg, Winston.
Charisma, commitment, and contemporary organization theory.
Business Topics, 1972, 20, 18-32.
Pepitone, A.
Attraction and Hostility.
New York: Atherton, 1964.
Peters, D.R.
Identification and personal learning in t-groups.
Relations, 26, 1973, 1-21.
Platt, J.R.
Strong inference.
Human
Science, 1964, 146, 347-353.
Raben, Charles S., and Klimoski, Richard J.
The effects of expectations
upon task performance as moderated by levels of self-esteem. Journal
of Vocational Behavior, 1973, 3(4), 475-483.
Raynor, Joel O.
Future orientation in the study of achievement motivation.
In Atkinson, J.W. and Raynor, J.O. (Eds.) Motivation and Achievement.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1974.
Rosenthal, R., and Jacobson, L. Pygmalion in the Classroom: Teacher
Expectation and Pupils  Intellectual Development. New York: Holt
Rinehart & Winston, 1968.
Runciman, W.G. Charismatic legitimacy and one-party rule in China.
Archives Europeenes de Sociologie, 1963, 4, 148-165.
Schlesinger, A., Jr.
On heroic Leadership.
Encounter XV, December, 1960,
3-11.
Seaver, W. Burleigh.
Effects of naturally induced teacher expectancies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,,1973, 28, 333-342.
Shils, E.A.
Charisma, order, and status.
1965, 30, 199-213.
American Sociological Review,
Shipley, T.E., and Veroff, J. A projective measure of need affiliation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1952, 43, 349-356.
37- 34-
Stedry, A.C., and Kay, E. The effects of goal difficulty on performance.
Behavioral Science, 1966, 11, 459-470.
Steers, Richard M. Task-goal attributes, n achievmeent, and supervisory
Orgnaizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1975,
performance.
13, 392-403.
Identification and changes: in prejudice
Stotland, E., and Patchen, M.
and authoritarianism. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
1961, 62, 265-274.
Trist, E.L. and Bamforth, K.W. Some social and psychological consequences
of the longwall method of coal-getting. Human Relations, 1951, 4
3-38.
Tucker, Robert C.
731-756.
97
The theory of charismatic leadership. Daedulus, 1968,
The need for infuence: development and validation of a
Uleman, J.S.
measure, and comparison with the need for power. Genetic Psychology
Monographs, 1972, 85, 157-214.
nAchievement, nPower and Effectiveness of research and
Varga, Karoly.
Human Relations, 1975, 28, 571-590.
development.
Winter, David G.
The Power Motive.
New York: The Free Press, 1973
An experimental investigation of
Young, E.R., Rimm, D.C. and Kennedy, T.D.
modification of assertative behavior. Behavioral Research and Therapy,
1973, 11(3), 317-319.
38